content/posts/get-stared-with-programming/1.md, before:

---
title: "Get started with programming 1 - Reasons to learn to code"
date: 2021-01-17T13:16:02Z
author: "Samuel Adekunle"
draft: true
images: 
  - "/cover.jpg"
comments: false
---

{{< figure src="https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1489533119213-66a5cd877091" alt="coffee-mug-on-table" caption="Photo by [Danielle MacInnes](https://unsplash.com/@dsmacinnes?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/start?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText)">}}

Hi there, and welcome to the inaugural post of my blog. I've had this domain name for a while and haven't done much with it, but I have decided to start a blog discussing different technology topics.

I have been coding for about two years now so I wouldn't call myself an expert, but I do have relevant experience and would like to use this blog to share my thoughts and experience with breaking into a software development career. For more about me, [click here](/about).

The first three posts will get started guide for programming to give a definitive guide on how to get started with programming. In this initial post, I will try my best to provide reasons to code.

## Five reasons to learn to code

### 1. To develop problem-solving and logical thinking skills

### 2. To improve communication and collaboration skills

### 3. For greater career prospects

### 4. To improve self-esteem and self-confidence

### 5. It's a fun and useful skill to have

## Final thoughts

In this post, I have highlighted why anyone might begin to consider learning how to code and not necessarily a career in software development. Everyone can learn how to code and should, but not everyone should pursue it as a career. Another example of this is that everyone should learn math, but not everyone should become a mathematician. In a [future post](/get-started-with-programming/3), I will be discussing how to know whether or not software development is a suitable career for you.

Next week in the [second instalment of this series](/get-started-with-programming/2), I will be discussing programming languages, revealing what I wished I knew when I started programming and how to avoid common beginner mistakes. Stay tuned!


## External sources

- https://www.themuse.com/advice/4-major-reasons-you-need-coding-skills-even-if-you-dont-want-to-be-an-engineer

- https://www.topuniversities.com/courses/computer-science-information-systems/why-everyone-should-learn-code

- https://skillcrush.com/blog/laurence-bradford-10-reasons

- https://www.inc.com/jeff-haden/21-side-projects-that-became-million-dollar-startups-and-how-yours-can-too.html

Commit message:

feat: added new post
Signed-off-by: Samuel Adekunle <me@samuel-adekunle.software>

content/posts/get-stared-with-programming/1.md, after:

---
title: "Get started with programming 1 - Reasons to learn to code"
date: 2021-01-17T13:16:02Z
author: "Samuel Adekunle"
draft: false
images: 
  - "/cover.jpg"
comments: false
---

{{< figure src="https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1489533119213-66a5cd877091" alt="coffee-mug-on-table" caption="Photo by [Danielle MacInnes](https://unsplash.com/@dsmacinnes?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/start?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText)">}}

Hi there, and welcome to the inaugural post of my blog. I've had this domain name for a while and haven't done much with it, but I have decided to start a blog discussing different technology topics.

I have been coding for about two years now so I wouldn't call myself an expert, but I do have relevant experience and would like to use this blog to share my thoughts and experience with breaking into a software development career. For more about me, [click here](/about).

The first three posts will get started guide for programming to give a definitive guide on how to get started with programming. In this initial post, I will try my best to provide reasons to code.

## Five reasons to learn to code

### 1. To develop problem-solving and logical thinking skills

I would like to begin with a quote from Steve Jobs, the co-founder of Apple:

_"Everybody in this country should learn how to program a computer, should learn a computer language, because it teaches you how to think." - Steve Jobs_

At its very core, computer science is not about typing out programs and making computers do stuff but finding solutions to problems in the most efficient way. This requires a lot of critical and logical thinking and the inevitable by-product of learning how to code is that you become a much better thinker. Regardless of what career you decide to pursue, these are skills you can take anywhere, making learning how to code one of the most valuable ways you can spend your time.

### 2. To improve communication and collaboration skills

Coding projects are rarely a one-person operation. Irrespective of how skilled you are, you cannot know everything, and you are likely to make mistakes. As a result, most projects involve multiple people with varied skillsets and ideas to work together in sync. This leads most software developers having very fine-tuned communication and collaboration skills, which is another universally transferable skill.

But even if you do not become a professional software developer, learning how to code will lead to developing a deeper understanding of technology which is a vital skill in today's world. There is probably a 99% probability that you use technology in your everyday life, and understanding how it works will give you a leg up no matter where you end up.

### 3. For greater career prospects

I don't think I need to convince anyone that there is a lot of money to be made in a software development career. [Click here](https://public.tableau.com/shared/KF6PW8C62) for an interactive end of year report by payscale.com for earning and job satisfaction across different sectors.

{{< figure src="/img/end-of-year-report-2020.png" alt="end-of-year-report-2020-by-payscale" caption="End of year report by payscale.com">}}

Learning how to code gives you many options on how and where to work. You could decide to work for someone else and be rest assured you won't be out of a job because software development jobs are abundant. Alternatively, you could become a freelance developer working for yourself and managing your own time.

Unsurprisingly, this is usually the number one reason people cite for wanting to learn how to code. But irrespective of the profession you go into, learning how to code will immediately make you a more valuable employee.

### 4. To improve self-esteem and self-confidence

Software development is a highly sought after skill that pays well. This naturally results in a higher level of self-esteem. Moreover, skilled programmers are usually headhunted by rival technology companies competing for their talents. This means no more lengthy online application processes and a feeling that you are needed and valuable.

However, just knowing how to code without going into a career in software development leads can also be just as empowering. You learn how to solve problems that would leave most stumped. You become one of the few people that understands how complex technology such as the internet works. People will begin to come to you to explain how things work and help them solve their problems. This will undoubtedly elevate your level of self-confidence.

### 5. It's a fun and useful skill to have

Once you've learnt how to code, there is a lot you can begin to do with your newly found skill. You can automate many repetitive tasks and boost your productivity to save time and money. You can build a website for yourself and create a presence for personal work or your business. And if you get an idea, you can create an app or website on the side that could become a second income source.

Many million-dollar startups today like Twitter, Twitch, Slack and Instagram all began their life as side projects of talented developers worldwide. Don't be afraid to get your hands dirty and build something anything you think could have potential value. Side projects are also an excellent way to validate your skill and show employers what you can do.

## Final thoughts

In this post, I have highlighted why anyone might begin to consider learning how to code and not necessarily a career in software development. Everyone can learn how to code and should, but not everyone should pursue it as a career. Another example of this is that everyone should learn math, but not everyone should become a mathematician. In a [future post](/get-started-with-programming/3), I will be discussing how to know whether or not software development is a suitable career for you.

Next week in the [second instalment of this series](/get-started-with-programming/2), I will be discussing programming languages, revealing what I wished I knew when I started programming and how to avoid common beginner mistakes. Stay tuned!


## External sources

- https://www.themuse.com/advice/4-major-reasons-you-need-coding-skills-even-if-you-dont-want-to-be-an-engineer

- https://www.topuniversities.com/courses/computer-science-information-systems/why-everyone-should-learn-code

- https://skillcrush.com/blog/laurence-bradford-10-reasons

- https://www.inc.com/jeff-haden/21-side-projects-that-became-million-dollar-startups-and-how-yours-can-too.html
